UH Tropical Agriculture and the Environment

Overview
 
How can we sustainably feed, clothe, and provide energy to more people using less land and fewer inputs? The Tropical Agriculture and the Environment (TAE) program focuses on creating solutions to answer this question and more. TAE as a STEM program, encompasses various fields and utilizes an interdisciplinary approach to address current and future challenges.
Choose From Five Diverse Tracks:
Environmental Soil Sciences
Healthy soils are essential for sustaining vital processes for living systems. Learn how healthy soils are generated, maintained, and restored in agricultural and natural systems.  
Pest, Pathogens, and Invasive Species
An incredible influx of pests threatens the sustainability and viability of agricultural and natural systems. Study the biology of and novel management approaches for controlling invasive insects, plant pathogens, and weeds. 
Environmental Urban Horticulture
Plants form an integral part of our urban habitats and influence many facets of our daily lives. Master the elements of landscape design and implementation. 
Plant Sciences
Plants are complex and diverse organisms that continue to challenge our understanding of behavior, communication, and evolution. Delve into their inner workings.
Plant Production and Management
The tropics pose particular challenges for the production of plant-based food, fiber, and energy. Learn how you can contribute to sustainable and secure production. 
Rewarding Career Opportunities
Agricultural Consultant/Manager 
Agronomist 
Business Owner / Entrepreneur 
Conservation Specialist 
Golf Course Superintendant 
HDOA Ag Inspector 
Industry Research Scientist 
Insect/Plant Disease Specialist 
Landscape Manager 
Molecular Biologist 
Science Educator

UH CTAHR - Plant Production and Management

Student Learning Objectives

Upon completing the BS in Tropical Agriculture and the Environment, students will be able to..

Demonstrate the ability to identify problems associated with agriculture, and apply the scientific method and practices to develop sustainable solutions from urban to rural environments.

Demonstrate the ability to critically evaluate scientific evidence, identify gaps in knowledge, and apply evidence-based arguments to solve issues associated with agriculture in a dynamic world.

Demonstrate responsible and ethical conduct, leadership, collaboration, respect for a diversity of viewpoints, and the capacity for life-long learning appropriate to professional and community-based practices.

Demonstrate understanding of the science of agriculture and its interaction with the environment from molecules to ecosystems.

Demonstrate proficiency in oral and written communication for both professional and general audiences.

Program Goals
Upon graduation, students will be able to:
Integrate discipline- and thematic-specific knowledge of basic and applied plant and soil sciences for its analysis, evaluation and application in the improvement, management, and production of sustainable managed and natural ecosystems.
Demonstrate an awareness of practices that minimize damage to the environment and ensure a safe sustainable food supply.
Perform competitively in the diverse professions available to them and to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by changing situations.
The Academic Program
The Tropical Plant and Soil Sciences (TPSS) program at UH Mānoa is unique. Students have an opportunity to take courses in sustainable tropical flower, fruit, and vegetable crop production, turf and landscape management, plant physiology, breeding and genetics, and soil science. They learn about the full spectrum of subjects and activities required to understand and responsibly manage land, water, crops, and their environments for the benefit of humankind. In addition, they learn about the adaptation and application of new technologies, such as molecular biotechnology, computer-based systems, and the internet, to enhance plant production systems, assure a safe food supply, and protect the environment.
Our students come from many backgrounds including those with little practical environmental or agricultural experience. They have in common a keen interest in applying science for the purpose of finding practical sustainable solutions to problems. Mature students are especially welcome. A host of career prospects await our students. The comprehensive undergraduate program affords students the opportunity to study molecules to whole plants to managed agro-ecosystems. Students majoring in TPSS prepare for careers including plant production and management, plant breeding and genetics, services, marketing, extension, research, and teaching. UH Mānoa students trained in tropical plant and soil sciences have embarked on successful careers in international organizations and governmental agencies, in ecological and environmental protection, in agricultural extension as individual entrepreneurs and teachers at all levels, in farming, in golf course/sports field management, park administration, landscape contracting, and as middle and upper management in corporate agriculture. They work in increasing the food supply, improving food quality, and assuring food safety while protecting the environment and improving the quality of life. Undergraduates are encouraged to obtain practical experience, which involves research under the direction of a faculty member, work in a commercial industry via our internship program, and completing the Agribusiness Certificate. Students have found satisfaction in applying their course work and research studies to challenging problems in business, environmental protection, land-use, and agricultural crop production.
Advising/Mentorship
Tropical Plant and Soil Sciences
St. John Hall Room 102
3190 Maile Way
Honolulu, HI 96822-2279
Tel: (808) 956-8909
Fax: (808) 956-3894
Email: leonhard@hawaii.edu
Undergraduates are required to consult with a CTAHR advisor prior to registration each semester. Go to ctahr.hawaii.edu/ugadvising for more information. Academic advisors are available by appointment only, Monday-Friday from 8:30 a.m.-3:30 p.m. (except holidays). Gilmore Hall, first floor, email: ctahradv@hawaii.edu.
Graduate students are advised initially by a research program advisor or by the department’s graduate program chairperson., Dr. Kenneth Leonhardt, leonhard@hawaii.edu.
Undergraduate Study
BS Degree
The Departments of Tropical Plant and Soil Sciences and Plant and Environmental Protection Sciences jointly offer a BS degree in Tropical Agriculture and the Environment (TAE). Students in this program complete a common core of courses taught by faculty in both departments and then specializations in one or more of the following areas:
plant production and management,
environmental urban horticulture,
pests, pathogens, and invasive species,
plant sciences,
environmental soil sciences.
Students who undertake this program of study will:
Demonstrate understanding of the science of agriculture and its interaction with the environment from molecules to ecosystems.
Demonstrate the ability to critically evaluate scientific evidence, knowledge and issues associated with agriculture in a dynamic world.
Demonstrate the ability to identify problems associated with agro-ecosystems and apply the scientific method to develop sustainable solutions.
Demonstrate proficiency in oral and written communication for both professional and lay audiences.
A student is required to complete 120 credits to graduate with a BS in TAE.
Requirements
Students must complete the UH Mānoa General Education Requirements, alternatives are available to the Hawaiian/Second Language requirement. An updated list of the courses recommended to satisfy the requirements is available from the undergraduate advisor. Courses at 200-level or above usually require prerequisites. The college has a core consisting of the following courses:
NREM 310 or HDFS 380/380L
Capstone or Internship (TPSS 492/492L or PEPS 495)
The department has a core consisting of the following courses:
TPSS 200
TPSS/NREM 304/304L
TPSS 470/470L
TPSS 499
BIOL 265
PEPS 421
Specialization in Plant Production and Management
Students are prepared to produce, manage, and market plants grown as crops or in landscapes with an emphasis on sustainable productivity with appropriate pest and disease management. Students learn to solve horticultural problems using evidence-based methods.
Students selecting this option need to take MATH 140X or NREM 203, BIOL 171/171L, BIOL 172/172L, and CHEM 161/161L and 162/162L and TPSS 492/492L. Some of these courses will fulfill part of the Natural Science requirement of the UH Mānoa General Education Requirement. These courses are considered prerequisite to some courses in the major.
Major Courses (Specialization in Plant Production and Management)
The following courses are required for this specialization:
TPSS 364
TPSS 420
TPSS/PEPS 481
PEPS 363/363L
PEPS 405
Elective Courses
In addition, the student must take 6 courses from a list of over 30 choices. The options available are listed on the Bachelor Degree Program Sheet, programsheets/.
Specialization in Environmental Urban Horticulture
The environmental urban horticulture specialization prepares students to effectively design, install, and maintain sustainable landscapes that include trees, shrubs, flowers, house plants, and turf grass that are used to enhance our living environment. Students of the program learn theoretical foundations, that lead to a practical understanding and implementation of how to produce environmentally and economically sustainable landscapes.
Students selecting this option need to take MATH 140X or NREM 203, BIOL 171/171L and BIOL 172/172L (or their equivalent), and CHEM 161/161L and CHEM 162/162L (or their equivalent) and TPSS 492/492L. Some of these courses will fulfill part of the Natural Science requirement of the UH Mānoa General Education Requirement. Some of these courses are considered prerequisite to some courses in the major.
Major Requirements (Specialization in Environmental Urban Horticulture)
The following courses need to be taken for this specialization:
TPSS 354
TPSS 463
TPSS 481
PEPS 363/363L
PEPS 405
Electives
The student must take 15 credits from a list of over 20 courses. The options available are listed on the Bachelor Degree Program Sheet, programsheets/.
Specialization in Pests, Pathogens, and Invasive Species
Students who specialize in pests, pathogens, and invasive species are prepared to design and implement pest management programs and conduct basic and applied research using multidisciplinary approaches. Students receive interdisciplinary education in entomology, plant pathology, weed science and invasive species management.
Students selecting this option need to take MATH 140X or NREM 203, BIOL 171/171L and BIOL 172/172L (or their equivalent), and CHEM 161/161L and CHEM 162/162L (or their equivalent) and PEPS 495. Some of these courses will fulfill part of the Natural Science requirement of the UH Mānoa General Education Requirement. Some of these courses are considered prerequisite to some courses in the major.
Major Requirements (Specialization in Pests, Pathogens, and Invasive Species)
The following courses are required for this specialization:
PEPS 350
PEPS 363/363L
PEPS 405
PEPS 422
PEPS 430
TPSS/PEPS 481
Electives
The student must take 12 credits from a list of 8 courses. The options available are listed on the Bachelor Degree Program Sheet, programsheets/.
Specialization in Plant Sciences
Specializing in plant sciences allows students to cross the traditional boundaries that have separated genetics, plant physiology, molecular biology, and their application to crop production. By linking laboratory approaches and plant production systems through the application of plant biotechnology students learn to solve multi-disciplinary problems. Students can select courses that allow concentration on genetic engineering or whole plant physiology and plant breeding to address real-world problems.
Students selecting this option must take MATH 140X or NREM 203, BIOL 171/171L, BIOL 172/172L, and CHEM 161/161L, 162/162L and TPSS 492/492L. Some of these courses will fulfill part of the Natural Science requirement of the UH Mānoa General Education Requirement. Some of these courses are considered prerequisite to some courses in the major.
Electives
Students are required to take 10 courses (30 credits) from a list of over 30 choices. The available options are listed on the Bachelor Degree Program Sheet. For information on a Bachelor Degree Program Sheet, programsheets/.
Specialization in Environmental Soil Sciences
Students are prepared to sustainable manage soils for the production of agricultural commodities and preservation of this important natural resource for human uses and environmental conservation. Students understand the chemical and biological processes that govern soil formation and nutrient cycling.
Students selecting this option need to take BIOL 171/171L, BIOL 172/172L, CHEM 161/161L and 162/162L (or their equivalent), PHYS 151, and Calculus I (MATH 215) and TPSS 492/492L. Some of these courses will fulfill part of the Natural Science requirement of the UH Mānoa General Education Requirement. Some of these courses are considered prerequisite to some courses in the major.
Major Courses (Specialization in Environmental Soil Sciences)
The following courses are required for this specialization.
TPSS 435
TPSS 450
TPSS 460 or NREM 477
TPSS 475
Electives
The student must take 18 credits from 14 electives courses for this specialization. The options available are listed on the Bachelor Degree Program Sheet, programsheets/.
Certificate in Agribusiness Management
This certificate fulfills business and management needs for undergraduate students in the technical fields of agriculture and for business/economics students who want to concentrate in agriculture. Faculty from four departments within the college coordinate and manage the program. The certificate is open to undergraduate majors in any CTAHR program, economics and business. ECON 130 or NREM 220 and BLAW 200 are prerequisites for the program.
The certificate program consists of courses concentrating on the applications of business management, law, accounting and marketing to agribusinesses with particular emphasis on the factors that differentiate agriculture and related products and services from other businesses. The certificate program includes three core agribusiness courses:
Core Courses (9 credits)
TPSS 322 or BUS 312
TPSS/NREM 341
TPSS/NREM 351
Academic Minor in Plant Production and Management
A minimum of 15 credits of upper division level courses must be completed with a grade of C (not C-) or higher for each course. Transfer credits toward the minor will be accepted if an appropriate UH Mānoa course is determined to be equivalent, and if the grade is C (not C-) or higher. Required courses are TPSS 200, 300, and 364. Several optional courses can be selected. See the TPSS academic advisor for details (Dr. Ken Leonhardt, email: leonhard@hawaii.edu).
