SCFS UHWO

Overview
The Sustainable Community Food Systems (SCFS) program serves to train new generations of food system professionals to think critically and across disciplinary boundaries to actively solve real-world problems through work in agriculture, policy-making, planning, business, research, health sciences and education.

A “sustainable community food system” is defined as one in which producers, retailers, community members and governmental and non-governmental organizations partner to create a vibrant and resilient local food economy that enhances and sustains the environmental, economic, and social health of a community.

UH West Oʻahu’s Bachelor of Applied Science with a concentration in Sustainable Community Food Systems (BAS-SCFS) prepares students for jobs in the sustainable food and agriculture sector in Hawai‘i and beyond. The BAS-SCFS is a multi-disciplinary, experiential and applied education program about key ecological and social issues in food and agricultural systems. It incorporates problem-based and hands-on learning to develop food system professionals capable of solving real-world problems and transitioning Hawai‘i agriculture toward greater ecological sustainability and social equity.BAS-SCFS courses are offered in person at the UHWO campus.


SCFS at UHWO

UH West Oʻahu’s Bachelor of Applied Science with a concentration in Sustainable Community Food Systems (BAS-SCFS) prepares students for jobs in the sustainable food and agriculture sector in Hawai‘i and beyond. The BAS-SCFS is a multi-disciplinary, experiential and applied education program about key ecological and social issues in food and agricultural systems. It incorporates problem-based and hands-on learning to develop food system professionals capable of solving real-world problems and transitioning Hawai‘i agriculture toward greater ecological sustainability and social equity.BAS-SCFS courses are offered in person at the UHWO campus.

BAS-SCFS Guiding Principles

Interdisciplinary breadth: Integrating natural science and social science theory and skills; 
Systems thinking: Understanding relationships among diverse components of farming and food systems, social institutions, and the environment;
Skill development: Gaining practical skills, including agricultural production, communication, research, analysis, problem solving, critical thinking, teamwork and leadership;
Experiential learning: Engaging in wide range of hands-on experiences in agricultural and food systems through laboratory exercises, field trips, internships, practicum courses and applied research opportunities;
Linking course content to the real world: Engaging problem-based learning opportunities, bringing practitioners into the classroom, sending students into the field, and discussing and analyzing these experiences in depth;
Community building: Being part of community that includes students, faculty, internship sponsors and practitioners, enhances learning and reflects the reality of professional life after college;
Honors the host culture of Hawai‘i: Designed to develop youth leadership in West O‘ahu, the BAS-SCFS program aims to integrate the study of traditional knowledge systems, indigenous natural resource management and values with Western empirical sciences and ethics.

Learning Outcomes/Core Competencies
Learning Outcome
Name
Description Upon graduating, the student will be able to…
I
Systems thinking
Analyze food systems using a trans-disciplinary approach guided by sustainability principles.
II
Critical thinking
Critically reflect on interactions between worldviews and power relations in food systems, recognizing one’s positionality and learning processes.
III
Research methods
Apply appropriate methodologies considering diverse ways of knowing.
IV
Practical skills
Demonstrate practical skills in the food system based on sustainability principles.
V
Communication
Communicate effectively in oral, written, and visual formats across multiple contexts.
VI
Team skills
Collaborate and demonstrate leadership skills and professionalism as inclusive member of diverse teams.
VII
Design solutions
Design, implement, and assess food system solutions across scales.
VIII
Advocacy
Advocate for equity and justice in food systems.

From Rolan et al. 2019. GENERIC LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SUSTAINABLE FOOD SYSTEMS EDUCATION.

SCFS Core Courses are designed to develop a systemic and multi-disciplinary understanding of the food system. Students study the history and development of agri-food systems, regionally, nationally and globally and its impacts on global environmental quality, human health and social and economic well-being. Pressing ecological and social issues in agriculture are addressed along with conceptions of ecological sustainability and social justice in the food system. Students develop a deep understanding of the most up-to-date scholarship in the transdisciplinary field of agricultural ecology and the political economy of the US and global agri-food system. The SCFS curriculum emphasizes the integration of theoretical knowledge with experiential and hands-on learning of sustainable agriculture practices in the field. Students also study a range of pressing ethical issues in food, agriculture and the environment in order to help them make more clear and ethically determined judgments. Details of each SCFS course can be found in the descriptions below.
